(lively music)
(keyboard clacking)
So, let's implement radix sort.
I've created a project, I've put the code
into package academy.learnprogramming.radixsort.
I've created our array that we're going to sort,
it's the same array that we went through in the slides
and I have code for printing out the array after the sort.
We're gonna create two methods,
one called radixSort and one called radixSingleSort
and you'll see what those do in a minute,
so let's start with radixSort,
so I'll say public static void radixSort.
We've gonna accept our input array,
the radix and the width.
Remember that for radixSort,
all the values have to have the same radix
and the same width
and then we're gonna say for int i equals zero,
i less than width,
i++ and we're gonna call the radixSingleSort method
that we haven't written yet
and we're gonna pass the input i and the radix.
And so, basically what we're doing here
is we're gonna call radixSingleSort
for each position in our values
and so, we have a width of four
and so, we're gonna loop four times
and each time we call radixSingleSort,
it'll do the sort based on one of the positions
and as you'll see, it'll start with the rightmost position
and then move to the rightmost minus one position et cetera,
so it'll be moving along the digits
from the least significant digit
to the most significant digit from right to left.
So, let's write the radixSingleSort method,
so we'll say public static void radixSingleSort
and it takes the input array,
the position and the radix.
And so, the first thing we're gonna do
is we're gonna say int numItems
equals the input array dot length,
so this just stores how many items
that we're gonna be sorting.
And then we're gonna say int countArray equals
and we're going to create a countArray
that's large enough to hold all the possible values,
our radix will be 10 'cause we will have digit zero to nine
and so, we'll have a countArray of length 10
and then we're gonna say for int value: input,
so for every value in our input array,
we're gonna count how many values have a certain digit
in whatever position we're looking at,
so we're gonna call getDigit
and we're gonna write this method in a minute
and we're gonna pass the position and the value
and the radix.
And this method is going to return the digit,
so it's gonna return zero to nine
and then we're going to increment the count by one,
so when we pass the first value, 4725,
five's gonna come back as the digit
and so, we're gonna increment countArray five by one.
So, before we go any further,
let's write the getDigit,
I'm just gonna remove this blank line here,
we don't really need it.
Let's write the getDigit method,
so you can see what it does.
So, we'll say public static int getDigit,
it accepts a position,
a value and the radix.
And it's not a difficult method.
It's gonna return value over,
we're gonna pass this to int
because we don't want to have
a floating point value returned.
I'm just gonna pass Math.pow 10, position
modded by the radix.
So, what the heck is this doing?
The Math.pow method takes the first parameter
and raises it to the second parameter.
We've passed in position zero
because here we're starting at zero,
so we've passed in zero for the position,
we have 4725 for the value and 10 for the radix
and so, we're gonna get Math.pow 10 raised to the zero
which is one, 'cause anything raised
to the zero power is one
and the division operator takes precedence
over the modulo operator,
so we're gonna divided the value by one, 4725 divided by one
is obviously 4725
and then we're gonna mod that by the radix which is 10.
Well, 4725 divided by 10 is 472
and the remainder's gonna be five
and so, that's what we're gonna return
and so, for position zero,
we're always gonna be returning
what's in the one's position.
So, let's say we call getDigit with position two instead,
so instead of calling it with position zero,
we called it with position two
which would mean that we're handling the hundreds.
We'd have 10 to the power of two which is 100,
we divided 4725 by 100
and we get 47 and then we mod 47 with 10
and that would give us a remainder of seven
and so, we'd return seven for the hundreds position.
If we wanted the tens position,
this would be one
and so, we divide 4275 by 10
and we get 427
and then we'd mod that with 10
and the remainder would be seven
and so, that's how the getDigit method
is figuring out what the value of the digit
at each position is.
So, returning back to our radixSingleSort method.
For each value, we're going to get the digit
at the position and on the first call
that position will be zero,
so we're gonna be returning all of the one positions
and so, it's going to increment the countArray,
it's gonna count all the values that have zero
in the one's position,
all the values that have one, two, three et cetera.
So, by the time we finish this loop.
We have a conventional countArray
where all we're doing is counting the number of values
that have a specific digit in their one's position.
But we want this to be a stable counting sort
and so, we're now going to do the step
that we discussed in the slides,
and we need to adjust these counts
so that instead of having just raw counts
of how many values, how many specific digit,
we want each position in the countArray
to contain how values have that digit
or less than that digit
and so, as I said, when we went over the slides,
all we have to do to get that
is sum up all of the counts up to and including the digit
that we're working on,
so to get the number of values that have three or less
in the one's position,
we have to sum up the counts in positions zero, one,
two and three and so, let's do that now,
so we'll say for int j equals one,
we don't have to handle the first index
because the number of values that have zero
or less in their one's position
are gonna be the number of values that have zero,
so we don't have to worry about changing
the first count, we just have to worry about changing
the counts in positions one and beyond,
so for int j equals one,
j is less than the radix
'cause that's the length of our countArray, j++
and we just say countArray j
plus equals countArray j minus one.
And so, what this loop is doing
is adding up if j is three,
it'll add up indices zero, one, two, and three
and assign and that'll be what countArray three
ends up being.
If countArray is five,
it'll add up indices zero, one, two, three, four and five.
That's what countArray five'll end up being.
So, at the end of this I'll put a comment in here,
adjust the count array.
And so, at the end of this loop,
the countArray has been adjusted,
so instead of containing raw counts,
it now contains the number of values
that have that digit or less than that digit
in the position that we're working with.
And so, at this point, we're going to do the step
that we went through on the slides
where we're going to copy the values
into a temporary array,
we're gonna work from right to left
so that we're preserving the relative ordering
of duplicates and so, we're gonna create
that temporary array,
so we'll say int temp equals
new int and we need that to be enough
to hold the number of items we have,
so we'll say numItems
and then for int tempIndex equals numItems
minus one, so we're starting at the end,
tempIndex greater equal to zero
and we're going to decrement it.
On each iteration, we're going to say temp
minus minus countArray
and again we're gonna use getDigit,
position, input tempIndex, radix
equals and this is gonna equal input tempIndex.
Now, when we went through the slides,
I actually called tempIndexK,
so we're doing exactly,
this is the exact same code we went through
on the slides and so, we're working from right to left
and we're looking at the countArray,
we're decrementing, remember using the prefix operator,
so we decrement the value at the countArray
for the digit first
and then we use that index to index into the temp array
and we assign the value at input tempIndex,
'cause that's what we're working with
and tempIndex starts at the end of the input array
and moves right to left.
So, because we're moving right to left
with the input array
and because we're writing from right to left
in the range of positions occupied
by a specific digit,
we preserve the ordering of duplicate values,
so if you're confused by what this code is doing,
go to the last video
because we went through it there,
just keep in mind that I called in the code
that I showed you tempIndex and K are one and the same.
So, at this point, we've copied our values
into the temporary array.
They're in sorted order in the temporary array,
so the last thing we have to do is copy them back
from the temporary array into the input array.
So, we could use system.arrayCopy
but let's just do it using a regular loop,
so for int, let's use the tempIndex again,
tempIndex equals zero,
tempIndex is less than the number of items
and we'll just increment it,
tempIndex++, input tempIndex
equals temp, tempIndex.
Nothing Earth shattering going on here,
just a regular old loop.
And so, to recap, we do the counting,
we just get the raw counts of how many values
have a specific digit at the position we're working at.
We then adjust those counts.
As we saw in the slides in the last video,
we then write the values into a temporary array
as we saw in the slides in the last video
and in the final step, we copy the temporary array
back into the input array
and then we return from this method
and then we return here to radixSort,
the values have been sorted based on that position.
And as you can see, we're going from zero,
one, two, three, four, five et cetera
depending on the width,
zero is the rightmost position,
it's the least significant digit.
That's how this getDigit method operates
because it raises 10 to the position.
Actually there's a mistake here.
This should be radix.
So, the final thing that we have left to do
is to actually call this method,
so we're gonna call radixSort
and we're gonna pass it our radixArray,
that's our input array, our radix is 10
and our width is four and let's run.
And we have 1330, 1594,
4586, 4725,
5729 and 8792.
We have sorted our array
and remember that the key thing here
is this has to be a stable sort
and so, that's why we're doing these extra steps.
We need a stable counting sort here,
an unstable counting sort will not work
because it would undo previous sorts
when we've sorted on less significant digit positions,
so we've done extra work here
to make our counting sort stable
and because of that, our radixSort
is able to sort these values.
So, that's it for sorting algorithms right now.
We're gonna see a few more later in the course
after we've covered some more data structures
because they make use of those data structures
but for now that's it, so I'll see you in the next video.